
    [Illustration: PINTAIL.
    _Dafila acuta._]




                         The Iowa Ornithologist
             Vol. 2.    Salem, Ia., January 1896.    No. 2.




                       Sea Birds That Visit Iowa.


                    FRANK H. SHOEMAKER, HAMPTON, IA.

            Paper read before the First Congress of I. O. A.

Under this heading I have considered the species of four
orders—Pygopodes, Longipennes, Steganopodes and Anseres. This is indeed
an inexact classification of “sea birds,” but will meet the requirements
of the subject in this case. The order Anseres is probably as a whole
the least entitled to a position under the general heading, but owing to
the maritime habits of many of the species the entire order is included.

The following list is essentially a compilation, since my residence
within the state has been too far removed from watercourses or lakes to
furnish opportunity for personal observation. My chief authority
throughout is the Report on Bird Migration in the Mississippi Valley
during the years 1884 and 1885. Frequent reference is made also to a
list of the birds of Iowa, compiled by J. A. Allen, constituting
Appendix B in Vol. II of the State Geological Survey of 1870. No more
than a passing mention of species can be made at this time.

The order Pygopodes has five representatives in this state—three grebes
and two loons. Holbœll’s Grebe is a species of northern regions, coming
south in winter occasionally to the upper portions of the Mississippi
Valley. The Horned Grebe is an allied species, more common than the
former, though not abundant; it is occasional in Iowa as a migrant, but
it is doubtful if it ever winters in any part of the state. The
Pied-billed Grebe, popularly known by a more forcible as well as a more
fittingly descriptive name, occurs in all parts of the state as a summer
resident, nesting quite commonly, though its eggs seldom appear in the
cabinets of those who do not know the peculiar nesting habits.

The family Urinatoridæ is represented by two species: the Loon proper,
Urinator imber, and its ally, the Red-throated Loon. The former is the
more common variety, inasmuch as it nests in the north and appears
regularly during migrations, while the latter variety, the Red-throated
Loon, is a distinctively northern species, and appears only during the
winter, very irregularly. Three years ago I saw a flock of Red-throated
Loons on a small lake in Franklin county, and after a long detour and
much careful crawling in a layer of snow and mud, succeeded in
approaching near enough to secure two of the birds at one shot. This is
the only time I have found loons of either variety in a flock; the class
is not gregarious and I would not be convinced of the identity until I
had the birds where I could compare with description.

The order Longipennes has ten representatives in Iowa, four of the
species being gulls and six terns. The Great Black-backed Gull is
mentioned by Allen as a rare migrant occurring within our borders. It is
probable that none have been seen within recent years. The Herring Gull
migrates over nearly all of the Mississippi Valley. Franklin’s Gull
breeds from southern Minnesota northward, passing through Iowa during
migration, but is not a common variety. Bonaparte’s Gull is strictly
northern in its nidification, wintering on the gulf coast and traversing
Iowa during migrations. The Gull-billed Tern is chiefly a coast bird
breeding on the Gulf of Mexico, but is occasionally reported from the
various portions of the Mississippi Valley. The Caspian Tern was taken
by J. W. Preston in central Iowa, but should probably be considered as a
straggler. It is an irregularly distributed species and is found chiefly
along the gulf coast. Forster’s Tern is a common variety in northern
Iowa, and is generally distributed over the state as a summer resident,
wintering on the coast. The Common Tern, according to Mr. Preston before
quoted, has been taken in Central Iowa. The Least Tern, while chiefly
coastwise in its habitat, is occasionally found in various parts of the
Mississippi Valley. I do not know at what place nor at what season
specimens have been taken in Iowa, but Mr. Allen names it in his list.
The Black Tern is the most common of the class with us as a summer
resident.

Of the Steganopodes there are two species. The Double-crested Cormorant
winters south and is common during migrations. I have taken several
specimens in Franklin county. The American White Pelican winters in the
gulf states and passes through Iowa to its breeding place in the north.

The order Anseres has thirty species which have been taken in Iowa. The
fish-eating ducks have three representatives, the American,
Red-breasted, and Hooded Mergansers, all of which I have seen in
Franklin county. The American Merganser winters south and nests north,
passing through Iowa as a migrant, one of the earliest. The Red-breasted
Merganser is said to be an occasional winter resident in favored
portions of the state, but is more common as a migrant. The Hooded
Merganser is a hardier species than the former, wintering further north,
though not frequently in Iowa, owing to the freezing of almost all the
water courses.

The Mallard is an early and abundant migrant. The Black Duck is chiefly
an eastern species, seldom found west of the Mississippi River, but
according to the Report on Bird Migration it has been known to breed in
Iowa. The Gadwall migrates in great numbers to congregate on the gulf
coast, but is said to winter in some parts of Illinois and possibly in
Iowa. The Baldpate ranges all over North America, wintering far south.
The Green-winged Teal breeds chiefly above the United States border, but
is a common migrant. The Blue-winged Teal nests further south, sometimes
in this state. The Shoveller breeds from Minnesota northward, migrating
commonly through Iowa.

The Pintail, the subject of our frontispiece, is an early migrant, but
unlike the greater number of the ducks which migrate first it does not
nest exclusively in the far northwest. It is a common breeder at Heron
Lake, Minn., and at Spirit Lake, Iowa, and has been known to nest in
portions of Illinois. The Wood Duck is a summer resident throughout the
Mississippi Valley. The Red-head is a common migrant, its range being
almost identical with that of the Pintail. The Canvass-back is known to
breed at Heron Lake, but I have seen no Iowa record. The Blue-bill and
Lesser Blue-bill, or Scaup, ducks occur chiefly as migrants, but are
summer residents in the northern part of Iowa, there being several
records of nesting at Clear Lake, in Cerro Gordo county. The Ring-neck
also has been found breeding there, this being the most southern record
of its nesting. It is, of course, chiefly a migrant. The Golden-eye
breeds north of Iowa, our only notes on the species classing it a
migrant and rare. The Bufflehead is chiefly a migrant, but is a summer
resident in the northern part of the state. The nesting has been noted
at Clear and Spirit Lakes. The Harlequin Duck is one concerning which I
find no definite Iowa notes, but on the strength of Mr. Allen’s list it
may be named as a winter visitor. The Black Scoter is another species
concerning which specific notes are wanting, but it is mentioned by the
same authority. There is a record of the Surf Scoter at LaPorte,
accredited to G. D. Peck in the Report on Bird Migration. The Ruddy Duck
is a migrant, according to Allen.

Among the geese, we have the Blue Goose, a regular migrant, which breeds
on Hudson’s Bay; the Lesser Snow Goose, a regular migrant, chiefly
following the rivers; the White-fronted Goose, which is known as a
migrant in all parts of the Mississippi Valley north of southern
Illinois, where it has been known to winter; the Canada Goose, the best
known of the Anseres; and the Brant, which occurs as a migrant. The last
named is so uniformly confounded with the Lesser Snow Goose that reports
on the species are very likely to be inaccurate.

The two varieties of Swans, the Whistling and Trumpeter Swans, occur in
Iowa. According to the Report on Bird Migration, the Trumpeter Swan has
been found nesting near Newton, Iowa. The Whistling Swan is named on the
authority of Mr. Allen’s list.


Note—During the discussion which followed the reading of the paper, Mr.
Morton E. Peck reported the occurrence of the Ring-billed Gull and the
Man-’o-War Bird at LaPorte, his home place. Mention was made also of the
Least Tern, the species having been seen in Winnebago county.




                      The Protection of Our Birds.


                   WILLIAM W. LOOMIS, CLERMONT, IOWA.

            Paper read before the First Congress of I. O. A.

The question how to prevent the depopulation of our feathered friends is
beginning to be agitated by many ornithologists and it might be well for
us to spend a few moments in discussing the problem. For convenience
sake let us consider the subject under three heads: Are birds useful? Is
there an unnecessary destruction of them? And if so, how can they be
protected?

I am sure that nearly everyone enjoys listening to the song birds, but
here in America we often do not consider the beauty of anything or the
pleasure it furnishes, as much as the dollars and cents it produces or
saves. So the first thing to be decided is, are birds, financially
speaking, beneficial? A recent number of the Youth’s Companion had an
article on the protection of birds. It says “We have thirty species of
insects which subsist on our common garden vegetables and our apple
orchards have fifty kinds of insect enemies.” It then names the birds
that are making steady warfare against the pests, and adds, “The
estimated annual destruction of crops by insects in the United States is
more than four hundred millions of dollars.” Now the more birds that are
killed, the greater becomes the damage done by vermin, and it is plain
to be seen that if the birds were allowed to multiply it would not be
long before they would save to the United States this four hundred
million dollars. Would not this be a benefit?

Concerning the usefulness of birds many persons, especially culturists,
seem to have erroneous ideas. Every farmer keeps one or more cats to rid
his buildings of rats and mice, and he willingly compensates them for
their services by giving them a liberal supply of food; but many of
these estimable men fairly get beside themselves if a hawk robs them of
a chicken. Now I claim that the hawks kill enough noxious animals to
more than recompense them for the loss of their chickens. To sustain
this statement let me refer you to the time when the legislature of
Pennsylvania passed the “Scalp Act.” This act placed a bounty of fifty
cents on every hawk and owl that was killed. What was the result? Well,
in eighteen months the state paid out no less than ninety thousand
dollars in cash and saved to the farmers one thousand, eight hundred and
seventy-one dollars in chickens.

This made eighteen dollars apiece for every chicken that was saved.
Rather expensive poultry. But this was not the worst, for as fast as the
hawks and owls decreased, the rodents and other pernicious animals
increased, and that year the loss of crops which the department of
agriculture attributed to the excessive number of injurious animals was
estimated to be about two million dollars. Does this not prove that the
raptores as a class are beneficial?

The robin is a bird that has incurred the enmity of gardeners. The
horticulturists near Boston sent a petition to the legislature
requesting that the robin be taken from the list of protected birds. An
investigating committee was appointed who found by examining robins’
stomachs that nine-tenths of its food consists of an injurious larvæ,
proving beyond all doubt that the bird was a great benefactor.

A gentleman from Michigan who signs himself “Amicus Avium” has given
special attention to the phœbe and has estimated the amount that this
bird annually saves the state. One pair of birds from March 15th to
October 1st, rears two broods or ten birds. Each bird eats thirty
insects an hour eight hours a day. The gentleman then finds the entire
number of insects destroyed and estimates that if they were permitted to
live, each one would do one-thousandth of a cent damage to fruit, grain
or lumber. Allowing one and a half pair of birds for every square mile
in the state, would make a saving of over three and one-fourth million
dollars.

I have dealt with only a few species, but have tried to select those
that deal with the entire feathered tribe.

Now if we grant that birds are useful, let us turn to the second head of
our subject.

No one wishes to leave the forests and prairies in their primitive
condition for the sake of the birds, even when he knows the progress of
civilization has caused and will continue to cause a decrease in
American bird population. We know that there were the same avicular
cannibals before the advent of the white man, as there are to-day, but
it will take a long time before the hawks or blue jays or cow birds can
exterminate a single species. It is of greater evil-workers that I wish
to speak.

First is the English Sparrow. These disreputable Britons were brought
here to destroy the span-worm, and they must be credited with having
done their work well. A limited number might be a good thing, but surely
their introduction has proved a case where “remedy is worse than
disease.” A few years ago these birds were sold for four dollars a pair,
and now I do not know but what one could be supplied with them at four
cents a pair, so rapidly have they increased. These foreigners are of
such a quarrelsome and pugnacious nature that the native songsters have
had to retreat from place to place before them. And now our feathered
friends are far from their favorite haunts, and greatly reduced in
numbers; unless a helping hand is given they will be compelled to follow
in the footsteps of the Great Auk. Of course we have no statistics to
show the number of birds that the sparrow destroys, but it is evident to
the observer that unless war is declared against him, we must say
good-bye to many of our native songsters.

Many birds are used every year to supply the demand of fashion. Mr. A.
J. Allen claims that there are ten million American women of a “bird
wearing age and proclivity,” and that it takes five million perfect
birds to supply them. The greater number of these are killed during the
breeding season and someone, I do not know who, will have to answer for
the hundreds of little birds that are left in the nest and allowed to
starve to death. Let us count one little bird for each pair of old ones,
this will make two and a half million. (Now some will say that this is
too many. Certainly! Not near all are breeding, but all that are, have
from one to six to a dozen offspring.) This makes in all seven million,
five hundred thousand birds that are annually used to decorate hats and
bonnets. Wholesale dealers count one hundred birds to the bushel. This
would make seventy-five thousand bushels, or more than enough to fill
ninety-three box cars. It is difficult for the mind to conceive of such
vast numbers of birds, and to think that they are used for what seems to
us, a worse than useless purpose. But what arouses the greatest
indignation in the lover of birds, is to see these same feather-bedecked
women go to Sunday School, get up before a class of boys or girls and
say, “You mustn’t rob birds’ nests, because it is wicked and only bad
boys do that.” It is to be hoped that the “New Woman” will bring with
her new and better ideas for decorating her head-gear.

Other destroyers of birds are the Great American Egg Hogs—the imitation
naturalists who cover up their crimes with a veil they call science.
These might be divided into two classes; those who collect for mercenary
purposes and those who collect simply to amass a great variety of birds
and eggs. Then we find a sub-class, those who are always collecting and
have not time to study just then, but expect to do that after awhile.
Why it is that these persons collect so many birds and eggs of the same
species is a mystery. One complains about his hard luck, saying he got
only one hundred eggs all day, one brags about taking one hundred and
seventy-five eggs of a rare bird; another boasts about “scooping” as he
called it, one hundred and twenty dozen in one day. What is the object
of this wholesale destruction?

If it were permissible for me to criticize so eminent a naturalist as
Dr. Coues, I would say I do not agree with him. He says in his “Key,”
“How many birds of the same kind do you want? All you can get. At least
from fifty to one hundred, and more of the commoner varieties.” That is
all right for colleges and museums, where there are many persons to
examine the specimens, but not for the private collector. I am afraid
that the worthy gentleman himself would soon object if each of the
several thousand collectors in the United States would follow his
advice. It is difficult to see how he expects to advance science so much
more by his one hundred stuffed birds than by the student who goes out
and takes notes from life. I will quote from Emerson, “The bird is not
in its ounces and inches, but in its relation to nature, and the skin or
skeleton you show me is no more a heron, than a heap of ashes or a
bottle of gases into which his body has been reduced, is Dante or
Washington.” We cannot tell about the character or habits of a person by
examining his body after he is dead and embalmed, yet it is by preserved
specimens of birds that the worthy gentleman attempts to work. What is
needed is more students and less collectors.

We all know of the great damage done by the pot hunters and the small
boy who robs nests and kills birds “just for fun,” but this can be
remedied by proper laws. It is the question of how to protect the birds
against other enemies, that we are to discuss.

What is to be done with the English Sparrow? One man suggests that if
every collector would invest in an air-rifle and use it on them it would
reduce their numbers. This might help, but I am afraid that it would
take more air and patience than could be found. Out of the many ways
which have been suggested, the only feasible one—at least in my mind—it
now employed by a few of the states, paying a bounty on the pests.

To prevent or rather change the fashion for wearing birds, some advocate
legislative action against hats trimmed with feathers. It is a question
in my mind whether such a course would prove feasible, for the ladies
have as much right to use the birds that way as some of our collectors
have to hoard them away in their cabinets. It is quite generally agreed
that the only way is to appeal to the better nature of the ladies and
trust them to put away the fashion and take up something more in keeping
with the close of the nineteenth century. Many ways are suggested for
bringing the subject before the public. One is by placing placards in
street cars, another is by distributing slips in churches, on which are
printed a few statistics showing the number of birds that it takes to
supply the demand, etc.

The next and most difficult question to solve is how to convince the
farmer that he is injuring himself every time he kills an owl or robin
or the other birds that he probably believes to be his enemies. Now we
all know that there are some “black sheep” among the birds. It seems to
me that one of the objects of our association is to point out to the
farmer just which these “black sheep” are. It is perfectly natural and
right for a man to protect his property, and even if he knows that many
of the raptores are beneficial, he does not like to have them take his
poultry. I do not know how to prevent the hawks from taking toll for
their work, but if the farmers would build respectable chicken-coops,
they would not be troubled with owls, for they being nocturnal are not
out until the chickens have gone to roost and it is only the farmer who
allows his poultry to sleep in trees that suffers, and we might say in
the words of the small boy, “It’s just good enough for him.”

Finally, I would say that the only way to preserve our birds is to
present facts to the people showing them the true character of each
bird. They can then distinguish how the {} should be treated, protecting
their friends and destroying their enemies.

Thus by awakening the farmer to his own interests, securing needful
laws, and with a never-ceasing warfare against the pseudo-naturalists
and English Sparrow, we may in time hope to recall to their own homes,
our favorite friends, the pursued and persecuted birds. As they return
to our door yards and take up life as in the days of yore, we will
become better acquainted and realize more fully their great mission in
this world.

This return will serve as a death warrant to the avaricious collector
and as an impetus to the student who devotes his life to the exploration
of the characters and habits of these, the favorites of nature.




                      Notes on the Birds of Iowa.


                JOHN V. CRONE, MARATHON, IOWA, COMPILER.

The Vireonidæ, our family for special study this quarter, is quite well
represented in Iowa, the reports embracing definite notes from sixteen
counties, and upon seven different species. No doubt the notes would
have been more profuse were it not for the fact that ornithologists are
somewhat tardy in becoming acquainted with the different varieties of
our smaller birds.


                    _624. Vireo olivaceus. (Linn.)_
                            RED-EYED VIREO.

The Red-eyed Greenlet is of wide distribution, not being confined to the
U. S.

In Iowa it appears to be quite generally found. However, the notes show
a dearth of either the birds or enthusiastic ornithologists in the west
and northwest portions of the state, since it is reported from only one
county,—Pottawattamie—in that region, while there are profuse notes on
the species from fifteen in the eastern and central parts.

It arrives in the state in late April and early May, breeds during late
May and all of June and leaves during the latter part of August or
September.

It is a more numerous migrant than summer resident; but is not rare by
any means during the breeding season, being reported as “common” or
“abundant” by nearly all who mention the numbers found through the
period of nidification. Assuming all those who reported on the species
to be equally versed in our favorite science, the numbers vary
considerably with locality. Most likely this is due to the topography of
the country in question.

The nest is pensile—a trite statement to most lovers of birds, yet new
to some of our readers perhaps—and is a beautiful and interesting
structure. The site varies considerably in elevation as will be seen
from the following quotations: “under thirty feet in elm and ash trees;”
“swung from the low branch of some bush or tree, between five and ten
feet from the ground;” “low branches of large trees or near the tops of
saplings;” “near ground between five and twenty feet up;” “lowest limb
of maple tree, seven feet up;” “suspended from the fork of a slender
limb, usually a few feet up; sometimes quite high;” “almost any height
from the ground.”

The “little basket” is “deeper and narrower than that of V. gilvus.” It
is “built of interwoven vegetable materials, hempen fibers and the soft
inner bark of trees,” a preference being noticed by Mr. Shoemaker for
the inner bark of the dead elm and ash. Mr. Giddings reports a nest
“composed of grass, pieces of hornet’s nests and spider webs. The
hornet’s nest had furnished fully one-half of all the nest. It was lined
with hair and fine grass.” Another nest described by Mr. D. L. Savage,
was “composed of fibers from the milkweed. Grass and cobwebs were
profusely used on the outside.” It was “pensile and cup-shaped and lined
with reddish fibers.”

The worst that can be gleaned from the reports on our little Greenlet
is, that it, innocently and unwittingly no doubt, helps to sustain that
despicable pest, the Cowbird.

Mr. D. L. Savage and Mr. Law each report sets of ¼ V. olivaceous and 1-1
Molothrus ater. In the nest before mentioned Mr. Giddings found on June
12, 1895, two eggs of the Vireo, and one of the Cowbird. The next day
there were three eggs of the Vireo, and two of the Cowbird. He finds the
Vireo much imposed upon by the Cowbird. Mr. C. C. Smith says, “With the
exception of the Chipping Sparrow, perhaps no bird is so much imposed
upon as this Vireo. I think that the Vireo will desert the nest if the
egg of the Cowbird is deposited first because one will often find one or
two eggs of the Cowbird in a deserted nest of the Vireo. Two or three
eggs of the Vireo with from one, two or three of the Cowbird is the
usual number. I have seen the following combinations, 624 1-4 and 495
1-1; 624 1-3 and 495 1-1; 624 1-3 and 495 1-2; 624 1-3 and 495 1-3.”

Evidently the Red-eye is not much in fear of man, since Mr. Heaton finds
it a regular resident in his door yard where it is under observation at
all times; and Mr. Barstch has found it nesting in the cities of
Burlington, Decorah and Iowa City.

The species has a “loud, clear song that can be heard in any woodland.”
It is “one of our best and most persistent songsters continuing during
its entire stay.” It “may,” says Mr. Smith, “be heard at all hours of
the day. Its song is rather monotonous and is uttered as the bird flits
about among the foliage. It has also a characteristic alarm note which
is uttered when the person gets too near its home; and the note is
nearly always a sign of the near proximity of the nest.”


                   _626. V. philadelphicus. (Cass.)_
                          PHILADELPHIA VIREO.

This species is reported from only two counties—Scott and Jackson. Mr.
Giddings thinks it may breed in Jackson county, since he has noted it
there during the breeding season. He finds it very rare, having seen the
bird only a few times. He first saw the species for the season of 1895,
on June 1st.

Mr. J. H. Brown finds it not uncommon in Scott county. In some seasons
he finds it a quite common migrant. He agrees with Mr. Davie that it is
very like V. gilvus, but finds it much more quiet during migrations,
“seeming to prefer tree-tops and rural districts.” He finds it rather
erratic, being common one year and perhaps rare the next.

Mr. Davie says, in his Nests and Eggs of N. A. Birds, that the species
is “not common wherever found;” but that “in portions of the Mississippi
valley it is more common than in the eastern states occurring regularly
and in considerable numbers during the spring and fall migrations.” The
I. O. A. needs to take this species especially in hand and develop
information concerning it.


                      _627. V. gilvus. (Vieill.)_
                            WARBLING VIREO.

This species does not seem to be so widely and generally distributed as
the Red-eye, or else it is not so well known. It is reported from twelve
of the sixteen counties heard from. “Common is the word most often used
in connection with its numbers. The compiler judges that next to the
Red-eye, it is the most numerous species in Iowa. The dates of its
occurrence are from April to September. June seems to be almost
exclusively its nesting season. Davie reports it as nesting in May and
June, but it must nest in May farther south, since none of the notes
report it earlier than June 12th. The compiler finds its commonest date
of nidification to be about June 20th.

The nesting site is higher than that of the Red-eye, or any other
reported. “Frequently nests in tops of maples in door yards as high as
forty feet;” “usually thirty or forty feet;” “generally higher than that
of the Red-eyed Vireo;” “usually placed at a considerable height;” “high
among trees;” “usually in horizontal crotch at greatest possible
distance from crotch of tree.”

All that can be gleaned from the reports about the nest itself, is that
it is pensile, cup-shaped and lined with fine grass. The nest in the
prairie groves of Buena Vista county is generally composed of coarse
grass and bark strips, very neat though rather rough on outside, and is
lined with down from the seed of the cottonwood tree.

Mr. Brown finds that the species seems to prefer the vicinity of towns
in migrations, but of groves and open woods for breeding. Mr. Peck notes
that it “nests about houses and along the edges of woods.” With Mr.
Smith it “inhabits the shade trees along the street.” Mr. D. L. Savage
finds it nesting “near the abode of man.”

Those who are acquainted with the Bronzed Grackle will call to mind how,
when one of these is aroused, it will utter its loud and excited cries,
soon calling around it others who join in throwing imprecations upon the
intruder, and follow him from tree to tree. The compiler has often found
the nest of gilvus by thus disturbing the Grackles, who in turn are
scolded by the Vireos, if the domain of the latter is intruded upon. The
note of the Vireo in such cases when it fears the safety of its nest,
somewhat resembles the cry of a cat.

Mr. R. M. Anderson found a nest in much the same way, by climbing to a
Robin’s nest which chanced to be near that of the Greenlet.

Reports upon the habits of the species are somewhat meager. Mr. Bartsch
refers us to the beautiful lines appended to the description of the
species by Coues, but I fear that these same beautiful lines are not
accessible unless one is near a college library, or so fortunate as to
own a copy of Mr. Coues’ valuable work.

The following from the pen of our honorary member, Mr. William Savage,
will be interesting to all. “He seems to be always cheerful if we may
judge by his song; but he is not safe from marauders. Snakes, cats,
weasels and minks often lay waste his possessions. June 15, 1895, I
found a nest containing three eggs. In a few days three little scrawny
young birds were wriggling in the nest making fruitless efforts to raise
their heads as I approached. The next day one was gone and the day
following, the other two had shared the fate of the first. I cut the
sprig of hazel off that held the nest and made it a point to pass that
way frequently. Soon I discovered the murderer, a beautiful snake, about
sixteen inches long—what we term the house snake—suspended in the hazel
bush, with his head and neck protruding over the very place where the
nest had been. (It is needless to say I slew him.)” The nest which Mr.
Savage mentions was four feet up.

Mr. Anderson found a nest five feet up. The bird was a close sitter and
allowed herself to be caught in his hand.

It is reported as a lively and pleasant singer almost as much so as the
Red-eye but with a sweeter song. Mr. Smith writes that it sings during
May and June, then is silent to August 15, when it again sings till its
departure. Mr. Bryan notes it as a beautiful singer and interesting
species.


                    _628. V. flavifrons. (Vieill.)_
                         YELLOW-THROATED VIREO.

Flavifrons is reported as being not so common as the Warbling and
Red-eyed species. Probably there would be a contest between it and
bellii for third rank in numbers. It is perhaps more evenly distributed
than the latter and not quite so plentiful where found.

Like most others of its tribe it reaches the state in late April and
early May, but the reports indicate that it is somewhat early in its
arrival. Its stay seems to be briefer also, since it is reported as
being last seen as early as August 10.

The nesting site is chosen at a considerable elevation, usually, though
Mr. Law reports one from Dallas county in a hazel bush one foot up.
Others mentioned are “in hickory tree fourteen and one-half feet up;”
“an oak, twenty-five feet up;” “near the top of a high tree;” “in
burr-oak tree twenty feet from the ground;” “ten to fifteen feet up.”
“The nest,” says Mr. Peck, “is a beautiful structure. It is covered with
lichens much like a Blue-gray Gnatcatcher’s, and is very hard to find.”

Mr. Anderson mentions a nest composed of dry grass, cottony substances,
thin pieces of bark and moss, and almost covered with bits of newspaper
in two languages; which latter item leads the analytical mind of our
correspondent to inquire whether the bird may not possibly be a
linguist. The nest was lined with reddish strips of grape-vine bark.
This nest was located in the same tree as those of a Robin and Mourning
Dove, and contained four eggs of the Vireo and one of the Cowbird.

A nest reported by Mr. D. L. Savage was outwardly composed of spiders’
webs and fibers of wild grape-vine bark, then a coating of newspaper and
a lining of fine grass.

The Yellow-throated is “a large, stout species,” robust built, and “the
brightest colored of our Vireos.”

While the song is described as being “slow, almost slovenly,” and “with
a peculiar languid drawl,” and lacking the animated delivery of
olivaceus and gilvus, yet it is much admired by Mr. Heaton, and the bird
is considered a fine songster by Mr. Giddings.

The female is a close sitter, leaving the nest reluctantly and even in
some cases requiring to be displaced by the hand. It is not averse to
making its home near the abode of man. Mr. Wm. Savage reports one pair,
who, when robbed of their treasures, presumably by the Blue Jays, tore
the old nest to pieces and rebuilt in a tree only six feet from the door
of his office and fifteen feet up. He finds one pair every year breeding
in a grove of about two acres near the house. He notes, though, that
even so close a proximity to the dwelling of man does not free the
species from the “piratical tyranny of the Kingbird.”

Mr. Woods finds “four rosy eggs” to be the usual complement, and that
they average larger than those of the Red-eye and Warbling. Mr. Smith
reports a set which average 80x59, 82x60, 80x60 and 82x59.

One case is reported where the bird left the nest which was found before
the eggs were laid, although it was not in any way disturbed. Mr.
Anderson says that “the birds scold with great vehemence when a person
comes near the nest and continue as long as he remains in the vicinity
even though some distance away.”


                     _629. V. solitarius. (Wils.)_
                           BLUE-HEADED VIREO.

Mr. Brown reports solitarius as a not uncommon migrant in Scott county.
He says that it is retiring and hurried, there seldom being more than a
few days between the first arrival and the departure of the bulk. He
finds it usually in large woods.

In Black Hawk Co., Mr. Peck finds it a sometimes abundant, but usually
not very common migrant. It appears early in spring, in company with the
hardiest of the warblers while on its way to its breeding grounds,
chiefly north of the U. S.

Mr. Bartsch has never observed the bird at Burlington but took two
specimens at Iowa City on the 6th of May, 1895. In actions he found them
quite similar to the Yellow-throated.

Mr. Anderson has taken two females of this migrant species in Winnebago
Co.; one May 14, 1892, and one Sept. 18, 1894.


                   _631. V. noveboracensis. (Gmel.)_
                           WHITE-EYED VIREO.

Mr. Bryan has seen this variety of the Greenlets quite common in the
edge of the woods along Squaw Creek in Story Co. He also has specimens
taken in Mahaska Co.

Mr. Wm. Savage reports it as a resident in VanBuren Co., but not very
common.

Mr. Brown says that while not much seen in summer it is a not uncommon
summer resident and fairly plentiful in spring.

Mr. Bartsch writes as follows: “Only two of these birds have come under
my observation; one at Burlington some years ago, and one at Iowa City
last spring. This bird prefers the low, dense willows and especially
small trees overgrown by a dense mass of grape-vines. Had it not been
for the lively and pleasing manner with which they delivered their
clear, ringing song, I should have overlooked them in a tangle of
green.”

Mr. D. L. Savage sends the following valuable notes in this connection:
“{} common. Have never found a nest, although I have noted the birds in
migrations, and also quite late in the spring.” Mr. Walter G. Savage,
VanBuren Co., found a nest with two eggs, July 18, 1894. Nest was placed
in hazel bush eighteen inches up and composed of pieces of rotten
chips—such as the Chickadee pecks out of its hole—moss, small pieces of
leaves, cobwebs and lined with very fine grass and inner bark fibers of
wild grape-vine.


                        _633. V. bellii. (Aud.)_
                             BELL’S VIREO.

The notes on this Vireo are not voluminous enough for the compiler to
derive from them any general conclusions as to numbers, dates and
nesting site.

Mr. Law finds it abundant in Dallas Co., but less so in Winnebago. He
has found the species breeding in the former, and Mr. Fred Hamlin took a
set of three incubated eggs on June 23, 1894. One of these was situated
in a hazel bush one foot up.

Mr. Woods finds it of common occurrence in Fayette Co., but not
abundant. “The eggs average a trifle smaller than the other species.”

Mr. Peck, writing from Black Hawk Co., reports it abundant everywhere
among thickets and underbrush in summer. The nest, which is small, he
finds situated two to six feet from the ground. Noted as a late migrant,
breeding far into August. It “is almost as quarrelsome,” he says, “as
the Yellow-throated. Its song is lively and shrill and distinguishable
at a great distance.”

Mr. D. L. Savage says, “Not uncommon, favorable locations being in
bramble bushes and thickets of undergrowth. It has a rollicsome little
song which always brings gladness with it. I have never had the good
fortune to find a nest, although I have searched repeatedly for it,
while the old birds were making quite an ado. It must be well
concealed.”

Mr. Bryan writes that he has seen it quite numerous in Mahaska Co.,
along wood-roads; and has secured one nest in a hazel bush in a river
pasture.

Mr. Irons says that the well known voice of this little bird is a
familiar sound in the woodlands of Pottawattamie Co.

Mr. Brown finds it a quite common summer resident in Scott Co., nesting
in late May and early June, usually at the low elevation of from two and
one-half to ten feet. “A quiet, retiring species and much more common in
the small brush patches in prairie districts than in the vicinity of
water courses or heavy woods.”

Mr. Giddings’ notes from his recent personal experience with the species
are in full as follows: “A common summer resident in this (Jackson) Co.
Not much known except to the ornithologist and collector. The home of
this species is in the thickets of brush and bramble, where it builds
its nest unknown to those who pass close by. The nest is suspended from
the fork of some small bush within a few feet of the ground, composed of
dead leaves, grass and strips of grape-vine bark. Generally somewhat
ragged on the outside. Four eggs seem to be the usual number and I never
found any other in complete sets. Nests mostly well concealed and hard
to find. I have found the best way is to get down and creep on the
ground, and by looking up, the nest can often be found quite easily.

“This species is, to me, the most interesting of the Vireos, and I
hardly ever tire of listening to its lively song, or watch it flit from
bush to bush. Near my place is a thicket of hazel, black-berry, sumach,
and a few small oak trees interspersed; just the place for Bell’s Vireo,
and I can hear it singing at most any time during the summer from my
doorstep.

“June 9, 1895, I started out to find some nests and soon succeeded in
finding two. The first was hung from a small hazel bush, four feet above
the ground and contained two eggs. Nest measured 3 in. deep; 3 in. in
diameter outside; cavity 1¾x1¼. June 11, 4 eggs; they averaged .68x.50,
pure white, quite well spotted with red. The second nest was in a place
where the bushes were quite low; was hung from fork of hazel bush three
feet from ground. The nest was composed of leaves, grass, bark of
grape-vine and plant down, lined with fine grass and hair. Measured four
inches deep; 2¾ in. in diameter on the outside; 1½ in. deep by 1¾ in.
inside. Contained four eggs above the average size and pure white with a
very few small red spots. Eggs measured .74x.52 average, with scarcely
any difference in them.

“I have not found this bird imposed upon by the Cowbird.”

Our readers will realize that to cultivate the acquaintance of the
little Greenlets is to gain health, pleasure and profit—health from
walks in the leafy woodlands and exercise in the fragrant air; pleasure
from the music of their voices and study of their ways; and profit from
health, pleasure and the priceless teachings of Nature.




                                The ...
                          Iowa Ornithologist.


  A Quarterly Magazine Devoted to the Study of Ornithology and Oology.


                            DAVID L. SAVAGE,
                         EDITOR AND PUBLISHER.


  SUBSCRIPTION
  RATES.

  One year                 40 cts.
  Single copy,             10 cts.

  ADVERTISING
  RATES.

  1 inch                      $.50
  2 inches                     .90
  ½ column                    1.70
  1 column                    3.00
  1 page                      5.00


  Entered as second class mail matter at the Post Office, Salem, Iowa.


Address all communications to
                                           David L. Savage, Salem, Iowa.




                            Notes and News.


We have received a very complete list of Iowa birds from J. L. DeVine of
Chicago, Ill., formerly from Iowa. Much to our regret, we cannot publish
the list in the I. O. for lack of space.

Mr. D. S. Ebersold of Oceanus, Florida, collector of natural history
specimens—his ad is on another page of this magazine—was once an Iowa
boy. He followed the plow, hoed corn and did other rural work in Butler
Co., and has many relatives there now.

The Naturalist and Collector of Abington, Ill., edited by P. Wilber
Shoup, has been discontinued as it did not receive sufficient patronage
to warrant its continuance.

Mr. Paul Bartsch of Burlington, Iowa, reports the taking of a Barn Owl
at that place on Nov. 22, 1895.

The American Ornithologists’ Union held their Thirteenth Congress at
Washington, D. C., on Nov. 12-15, 1895, with an average attendance of
fifty ornithologists. The officers elected by the Union for the year,
were as follows: President, William Brewster; Vice Presidents, Robert
Ridgway and C. Hart Merriam; Secretary, John H. Sage; Treasurer, William
Dutcher.

Dr. A. E. Foote, the distinguished scientist of Philadelphia, died Oct.
11, 1895, in Atlanta, Ga., to which place he had gone to take charge of
the Pennsylvania mineral exhibit.

Dr. Foote was born in Hamilton, N. Y., Feb. 6, 1846. Soon after
graduating at the State University of Michigan in 1867, he was appointed
assistant professor of chemistry and mineralogy in the Iowa State
College, which place he held for five years, being very successful as a
teacher. In 1875 he moved to Philadelphia, and began the building up of
his now world wide business in minerals and scientific books. He was
married in 1872, to Miss Augusta Matthews of Iowa, who, with two sons
and a daughter, survives him. His business will be continued by Warren
G. Foote, a son of the deceased, as manager.

Mr. J. H. Brown, Iowa City, Ia., writes: “I shot three Greater Redpolls
on Jan. 11, and one the 13th inst. They were undoubtedly of the variety
Acanthis linaria rostrata (Coues). I have never seen mention of this
variety occurring in the state before.”

Mr. John V. Crone has a live Snowy Owl which was wing-tipped and
captured near Marathon, Iowa, about Dec. 20. He is thriving on a diet of
meat of different kinds, including sparrow, turkey, grouse and pork;
diversified by occasional bites from his captor’s fingers.

Prof. Gus. Walters, Cedar Falls, Iowa, writes: “We are taking some
interest in birds here. Have captured the Purple Finch and Rusty
Grackle. Secured a fine Meadow Lark, Dec. 27—rather late for him.”

The Northwestern Ornithological Association held its second annual
meeting at Portland, Ore., Dec. 27, 1895. The forenoon was devoted to
business; the afternoon to reading of papers and election of officers.
The officers chosen were; Wm. L. Finly, Pres.; Ellis F. Hadley, 1st Vice
Pres.; Guy Striker, 2d Vice Pres.; Arthur L. Pope, Sec.; D. C. Bord,
Treas.

The N. O. A. is a live association, as is shown by the fact that the
past year it has compiled a list of Oregon birds embracing over twice as
many as were ever before contained in a list of birds of Oregon. This
list is being published in the Association’s official organ, the Oregon
Naturalist and will number 254 species and sub-species.

Hereafter the Association will admit associate members from any part of
America, and its members expect to have a phenomenal growth during the
next few months. For particulars address the secretary at McMinnville,
Ore.

A. I. Johnson, DesMoines, Ia., while out collecting Nov. 25, saw two
Robins and Dec. 3, secured two Red-winged Blackbirds from a flock of 8.




                              Book Review


    [Illustration: Book Review]

  New Books and other publications will be reviewed in this department.
  Authors wishing publications reviewed should send them to the Editor,
  who will examine them personally and give them due consideration.

“A. O. U. Check-list of American Birds.” This book was prepared by a
committee appointed by the Union, namely, Elliott Coues, J. A. Allen,
Robert Ridgway, William Brewster, and H. W. Henshaw. This is the second
and revised edition, the original edition was published in 1885. The new
edition includes numerous additions and nomenclatural changes made since
the publication of the first, together with a revision of the “habitats”
of the species and sub-species, but omitting the Code of Nomenclature,
which was published separately in 1892. It is expected that the new
Check-list will remain without another edition for at least ten years.
It should be in the hands of every ornithologist.

“The Popular Science News” for January is much improved and enlarged.
This magazine fills a special field; it seems that it is intended more
for the general reader than the specialist, yet neither can afford to be
without it. Probably there is no paper in America that is doing more to
popularize science and to interest the general public in scientific
knowledge, than this journal. We do not hesitate to recommend it to any
one who desires to keep abreast with the discoveries and news in the
scientific world.

The December, 1895, issue of the “Nidologist” shows a marked improvement
by way of illustrations. Among the features above par, the elegant
design on the cover presents itself. The view of Heligoland, “the
magnetic pole of the bird world,” is of consummate interest. Last, but
not of the least value, is the half-tone of the brethren at the A. O. U.
Congress at Washington; this illustration alone is worth a year’s
subscription.

“The American Zoologist and Journal of Science” made its appearance with
the new year. The first issue of Vol. 1, contains thirty-six pages of
very interesting and instructive reading matter. It is edited by J.
Hobart Egbert of Holyoke, Mass.




                         Publications Received.


Barrows, Walter B., and E. A. Schwarz. “The Common Crow of the United
States.” Bull. No. 6, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1895, pp. 1-98, 1 pl.
2 figs.

Beal, F. E. L. “The Crow Blackbirds and Their Food.” Reprinted from the
Yearbook of the U. S. Dept. of Agriculture for 1894. Pp. 233-248, figs.
1.

Beal, F. E. L. “Preliminary Report on the Food of Woodpeckers.” Bull.
No. 7, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1895, pp. 1-33, 1 pl., 3 figs.

Burns, Frank L. “The American Crow, (Corvus americanus) with special
reference to its nest and eggs.” Bull. No. 5, Wilson’s Orn. Chap, of
Agassiz Assn., 1895, pp. 1-41.

Fisher, A. K. “Hawks and Owls from the Standpoint of the Farmer.”
Reprinted from the Yearbook of the U. S. Dept. of Agriculture for 1894.
Pp. 215-232, pl. 3, figs. 3.

Jones, Lynds. “Minotiltidae.” Bull. No. 4, Wilson Orni. Chap. of Agassiz
Assn., 1895, pp. 1-22.

Lucas, F. A. “The Tongues of Woodpeckers.” Bull. No. 7, U. S. Dept. of
Agriculture, 1895. Pp. 35-41, pl. 3.

“The A. O. U. Check-list of North American Birds.” Second and revised
edition. Issued by the American Ornithologists’ Union, 1895. Pp. 1-372,
I-XII, 8vo, cloth.

“The Nidologist.” Vol. 3, No. 4. Dec. 1895.

“Popular Science News.” Vol. 30, No. 1. January, 1896.

“The Oologist,” Vol. 12, No. 12. December, 1895.

“Oregon Naturalist.” Vol. 3, No. 1. January, 1896.

“Gameland.” Vol. 8, No. 1. December, 1895.

“The American Zoologist and Home Journal of Science.” Vol. 1, No. 1.

“Game and Shooting.” Vol. 1, No. 11.

“The Linnean Fern Bulletin.” Vol. 4, No. 1, January 1896.

For the lack of space, we cannot give further mention of publications
received. In our next issue we shall give more space to this department.




                           Iowa Ornithologist


                               SUPPLEMENT

No. 1. Salem, Ia., January, 1896.

We do not desire to expose the private affairs of the I. O. A. to the
general public, hence the necessity of the I. O. Supplement. Copies are
sent only to the members of the I. O. A.




                            Among Ourselves.


I desire to extend thanks to those members who have sent in new
subscribers. Continue the good work. The Chairman of the Finance
Committee says: “Wake up the boys, in your next issue, to secure
subscribers and members—we must have them to succeed.”

Always when you write enclose some note on the birds.

Each officer of the I. O. A., and chairman of each committee, is
requested at the close of every quarter to send a report of their work.
Remember this on April 1st.

Some time ago I forwarded the names of Guy C. Rich, Sioux City, and M.
Earl Halvorsen, Forest City, for active membership and W. E. Mulligan,
Grand Rapids, Mich., for associate, to the executive council; have not
heard from them yet. Please be more prompt.

According to Sec. 8 of the By-Laws, the annual dues of active members
are $1.00, payable January 1st of each year. If you have not paid your
dues for 1896, this paragraph is marked with a blue pencil. Please do
not delay remitting.

Mr. E. B. Webster, Cresco, Ia., is doing the printing of Vol. II for
$80.00, same to be made in two payments: first, when second issue is
completed, and second, when the fourth issue is printed. We have 500
copies printed of each issue.




                    Financial Report of the I. O. A.


                   From Oct. 1st to Dec. 31st, 1895.

                           RECEIPTS.

  From members dues                                     $9.50
  Subscriptions to I. O.                                 6.85
                                            Total    ($16.35)

                         EXPENDITURES.

  Postage on I. O.                                      $ .28
  Postage on manuscript and electros to Cresco            .80
  Freight on I. O. from Cresco                            .78
  Postage for Editor-Treasurer                           2.24
                                            Total     ($4.10)

  Amt. on hand for quarter                             $12.25
  Deficiency Oct. 1st                                  $12.25
  Acc’ts balance Dec. 31st, 1895.

                        DAVID L. SAVAGE, Treas.




                                Notice.


The compilation committee appointed at the First Annual Congress of the
I. O. A. has begun work and expects, by the time of the Second Congress,
to be held next summer, to make a good showing on a report which is to
be, if possible, a complete “Annotated List of the Birds of Iowa.” In
order to make this list as comprehensive as possible, it is earnestly
requested that every member send to the chairman of the compilation
committee a marked check list showing every species on which he can
furnish original, authentic Iowa notes. These lists will be examined and
whenever a species is noted on which the report of the committee is
lacking, incomplete or unsatisfactory, the notes on that species will be
sent for. The marked check lists should all be in the hands of the
undersigned before May 31, 1896. This early notice is given in order
that members may observe, with especial caution, during the spring of
’96, for fresh and valuable notes. These notes should bear particularly
on the food, breeding habits, abundance of individuals, economic value,
and migrations.

                              Fraternally,
                                                         Chas. R. Keyes,
                                                           Chairman Com.

Address until May 31st, Blairstown, Iowa.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Created a cover image based on elements in the printed exemplar.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iowa Ornithologist, Volume 2, No.
2, January 1896, by Various

